Page 1 of 7 
Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA): 
Authorised Economic Operators 
(AEOs) 
Title of proposal 
This is an initial Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) for the amendment to the 
Council Regulation (EEC) no. 2913/92 establishing the Community Customs Code 
(CCC) to allow the introduction of Authorised Economic Operators (AEOs). 
1.  Purpose and intended effect of measure 
1.1  Background  
The amendment to the CCC, adopted by the European Parliament on 23.2.2005, 
allows Customs authorities to grant the status of AEO to any business that satisfies 
EU criteria. An AEO will be able to benefit from simplified customs controls and 
procedures. The criteria to be applied and specific simplifications will be set out in the 
Implementing Provisions (IP) for the CCC 2454/93. As these are not yet available a 
detailed analysis of the specific costs and benefits has not been possible. 
1.2  Scope  of  Change  
This RIA relates to: 
•
the introduction of the status of AEOs 
•
the AEOs status to be issued by a single MS and recognised by 
all other MS 
•
the provision for an AEO to be a non-EC established entity 
•
defining the procedures/ criteria to be applied when granting 
AEO status to ensure consistency across the community. 
A separate RIA on ‘Pre-Arrival/Departure Declarations, Data Sharing and Risk 
Assessment’ covers the other aspects of this Code amendment; copies available on 
request. 

Page 2 of 7 
2. Risk Assessment 
2.1  Current  arrangements  
Traders wishing to benefit from Customs simplifications or facilitations have to apply 
to each Member State (MS) in which they operate (the exception to this is the Single 
European Authorisation (SEA) where the other MS involved have to approve the 
authorisation, but they are limited in scope, unwieldy and time-consuming to set up). 
This results in: 
•
no EU-wide recognition of trader status 
•
different approval criteria and post-approval controls applied 
•
traders may qualify for a simplification in one MS but be rejected 
by another 
•
no commonly agreed levels of facilitation for authorised traders - 
level of simplifications differ across MS 
•
multi-national companies have to retain different records/ comply 
with different operating procedures 
•
creation of procedures that are incompatible and systems that 
are unable to communicate on an EU-wide basis. 
Different levels of risk assessments, frontier interventions and post-clearance 
controls are carried out. This results in: 
•
inconsistency in treatment for traders 
•
uncertainty over delivery timescales for traders operating on a 
‘just-in-time’ principle. 
2.2  New  system  
The detailed criteria and conditions of the AEO scheme are not yet available but the 
following generic risks have been identified and will be reviewed once the IP are 
made available: 
The new system fails to take account of the current capabilities and cultural 
differences of the various MS. This results in: 
•
individual MS opt out, minimise the implementation or fail to 
recognise the status of AEO assigned to a trader by another MS 
•
the scheme will fail to deliver the fullest benefits and costs will 
escalate for the traders concerned. 
Inconsistencies across MS in application of controls/approval criteria. This results in:  

Page 3 of 7 
•
inconsistency of treatment for the trade 
•
increased risks for society in terms of trader compliance and anti-
smuggling controls in particular (achieving AEO status in any MS 
does not exempt traders’ consignments from examination at 
either import or export where there is reason to believe that illicit 
goods are being carried/concealed) 
•
traders migrate to the MS where it is perceived as being easier to 
gain status having a knock-on impact upon the level of import 
duties collected by each MS. 
However, the AEO system is designed to bring about benefits to the trade by offering 
access to customs simplifications and/or relaxations in security requirements to 
facilitate quick clearance time from ports. 
3. Options 
The tableson the following pages provide an initial assessment of some of the 
possible impacts and risks resulting from the introduction of AEOs. 
3.1  Preferred option prior to detailed consultation 
Option 3 would provide the most benefit to traders, allowing them to apply for AEO 
status/ simplifications in a single MS for EU-wide validity. There are potential 
problems, for example, in dealing with, and enforcing, prohibitions and restrictions 
that vary across the Community. Option 2 would require perhaps only slightly more 
resources from the trade, but would provide more control for HMRC to fulfil its legal 
obligations with respect to the new proposals. The option to support is still under 
discussion at policy level. 
3.2  Business sectors affected 
The AEO scheme will be available to all traders involved in import and export 
activities irrespective of trade sector or size. However, dependent upon the level of 
criteria/ conditions imposed upon approvals the scheme may not be attractive to 
Small Businesses. 
The proposal does not currently state whether the scheme will be restricted to 
declarants but the UK would wish to see this scheme made available to third parties 
also as this would provide a more cost-effective route for Small Businesses to benefit 
from the simplifications. 
Customs agents/ representatives play a vital role in making simplifications/ 
facilitations available to smaller businesses. The representative applies for the 
procedure in their own name and then undertakes the Customs formalities on behalf 
of the smaller firms allowing them to benefit (via the third party) from using simplified 
procedures. 

Page 4 of 7 
An initial analysis of the likely trade sectors that may be affected by this proposal is 
shown below: 
Analysis of the likely trade sectors that may be affected 
Multi-nationals, Other 
companies importing/ 
exporting via more than 
one MS. 
Need to harmonise procedures/ system 
requirements across EU. If one-stop shop approval 
allowed (ie, option 3) greatly simplified approvals 
process and proportionate reduction in compliance 
costs. 
Small Businesses if import 
/ export is major part of 
business – although they 
might want to make use of 
third party AEOs. 
Possibility that criteria/ conditions of approval and 
associated supply chain requirements may make 
costs of becoming approved disproportionate to 
benefits. 
Importers/Exporters. Need to apply for AEO status in order to gain/ retain 
simplifications. Added layer of bureaucracy. 
Software Suppliers/ 
computer bureaux. 
Amendment of software packages, expansion of 
clientele population, new markets – supply chain 
security packages. 
Customs Brokers/ 
Consultants. 
New business opportunities – consultancy on AEO 
applications, supply chain security, MS 
administrative procedures. 
Logistics Operators, 
Carriers, Freight 
Forwarders, Couriers, 
Agents. 
Requirement to provide supply chain security 
assurance, high likelihood they would need to 
become AEO to retain business. 
Community Service 
Providers (CSPs)/ Port 
Authorities. 
Linked with pre-arrival/departure declaration 
initiatives – need to cater for new data sets/ 
additional information requirements, new submission 
time limits. Also need to cater for AEO specific 
simplifications alongside standard import/ export 
requirements. 
3.3  Issues of equity and fairness 
It is not envisaged that there will be any issues of inequity or fairness arising from 
these proposals providing that the AEO scheme is not restricted to a specific trade 
sector/ type. 
3.4  Compliance  costs  
Until the specific details of the approval criteria and conditions, levels of 
simplifications and waivers to be included within this change are provided it is not 
possible to quantify the average compliance costs of a business/ trade sector. 

Page 5 of 7 
3.5  Other  costs.  
At this point it has not been possible to analyse any hidden costs that could occur as 
a result of these proposals. 
4.  Consultation with small business: the Small 
Firms’ Impact Test 
At this point, there has been some consultation through working groups and a 
website, with businesses. There has not been any formal consultation as yet. The 
Small Firms’ Impact Test has not been carried out at this stage. 
5. Competition assessment 
The competition assessment has not been completed at this stage. 
6.  Enforcement and Sanctions  
6.1  How will the proposal be enforced? 
The proposal will be enforced by HMRC – frontier staff/ regional business assurance 
staff through normal assurance and frontier controls. 
6.2  Will the legislation impose criminal sanctions for non-
compliance? 
There is a civil penalty system in place, which can be used for non-compliance with 
regards to fiscal matters. Current practice allows for the use of compound penalties 
and offence action to be taken in the event of illegal imports, prohibition and 
restriction matters. Initial indications are that these practices would be extended to 
cover AEO activities. 
7. Monitoring and review 
This RIA will be subject to formal evaluation 12-months after the new Regulation 
comes into force. This will be undertaken in partnership with the Joint Customs 
Consultative Committee (JCCC) working groups. 
8. Consultation 
Consultation has taken place with the Frontiers and International Trade working 
groups and feedback has been received from BIFA, SITPRO, AICES, ASM, Rolls 
Royce and Bell Davies. A copy of the initial consultation findings is at Annex 2. 
Further trade consultation will take place through the JCCC. 

Page 6 of 7 
Consultation has also been carried out within HMRC, Frontiers and International 
Trade on this issue and a copy can be found at Annex 2. Future consultation will be 
carried out via the Customs Code Working Group. 
9. Summary and recommendation 
It is envisaged that option 3 would provide the most benefit to traders, allowing them 
to apply for AEO status/ simplifications in a single MS for EU-wide validity. Until such 
times as the detailed criteria and conditions are available specific costs and benefits 
cannot be quantified. There is currently an EU working group examining this issue 
and they are due to report in the latter half of this year. 
10. Declaration 
I have read the regulatory impact assessment and I am satisfied that the benefits 
justify the costs 
Signed ................................... 
Date ..................... 
Dawn Primarolo, 
Paymaster General, HM Treasury. 
Contact point 
Sanjay Aeri 
100 Parliament Street 
London 
SW1A 2BQ. 
Telephone: 0207 147 0003 
Fax: 0207 147 0131 
Email: Sanjay.Aeri@hmrc.gsi.gov.uk
Annex 1 - Commission Proposal document 
Articles covered by this RIA 
This RIA covers article 5a of the proposal document
. The ‘Pre-arrival/ Departure 
Declaration, Data Sharing and Risk Assessment’ RIA covers the remaining articles. 
Annex 2 - Consultation findings 
Internal consultation findings
External consultation findings

Page 7 of 7 
Annex 3 - Associated papers 
The RIAs listed below relate to other areas of the Commissions programme of 
change: 
•
General Overview of the Modernisation of the Community 
Customs Code.
•
Pre arrival/ departure declarations, Risk Assessment and Data 
Sharing.
•
SAD Harmonisation.
•
Simplified Procedures.
•
Special Procedures
.
•
Multi-Annual Strategic Plan (MASP).
•
Customs Debt.
•
Other Miscellaneous Articles.
Copies can be provided on request.