

═══════ [impact-assessments:2023-49:1] Impact assessment  (418 words) ═══════
Regulatory Impact Assessment Screening A consultation to consider making careless driving 
a fixed penalty notice offence 
  
Regulato
ry 
Screening Questions 
Response to Screening Questions 
    Full Impact 
Assessment Required 
Justification / Key issues and groups to focus on 
Yes    No 
Yes   No 

Is the policy or amendment to the policy likely to have a direct or indirect impact on businesses? 
 
X 
     X 
Legislation already exists to enforce careless driv
ing 
in Northern Ireland.  But the current process – where all cases are prosecuted through the courts system – is overly bureaucratic and resource intensive for police, the courts and prosecution services. The policy objectives are to improve the efficiency
 of 
the enforcement regime and allow remedial training to be provided for low level offenders.   Fixed penalties are a recognised way of delivering proportionate justice for low level offending as th
ey 
offer a quick and effective disposal option. They a
lso 
provide a swift and simple method of deterrence and reduce the amount of time that police officers spend completing paperwork and attending court while simultaneously reducing the burden on prosecution services. A further objective is to consider how any move to make careless driving a fixed penalty offence may enable police to use dash-cam footage, submitted from private motorists and riders, to investigate a
nd 
enforce poor driving behaviour through an offer of remedial training or a fixed penalty notice. The intended effects of this policy are that the po
lice 
will be able to improve the level of enforcement without substantial extra costs and in combination 

with remedial training reduce the prevalence of careless driving. The main groups affected by this policy would be drivers and riders and the main criminal justice agencies currently involved in prosecuting careless
 
driving offences.. 
Is the policy or amendment to the policy likely to have a direct or indirect impact on the voluntary /
 
community sector?
1
 
 
X 
     X 
As above. The main groups affected by this policy would be drivers/riders and the main criminal justice agenci
es 
currently involved in prosecuting careless driving offences. 
CONCLUSION 
 
X
 
The policy proposal will not impose any costs or an
y 
savings on business, charities, the social economy enterprises or the voluntary sector. 
                                                        1
 
NOTES: 
 This Includes charities and the social economy sect
or. 

Endorsement  I can confirm that the proposed policy has been scr
eened for regulatory impact and has been screened o
ut for a full regulatory impact 
assessment.    
Signed: 
Donald Starritt 
 
  
Agency/Division: 
Safe & Accessible Travel Division 
 
 
Date: 
29 October 2021